9/1

See my thoughts on Subtle Judgment as a prerequisite if you are curious, 
this is more about the dreaded question of “Tell me about yourself”.

Every time I am confronted with this question, I am rendered speechless. 
To me, it is such a difficult question. Why? It mostly stems from the 
fact that there are many things I could say to describe myself. The 
importance of this question is understated. This is sometimes the first 
question that is asked by a new acquaintance. Your answer is how you 
are assessed and viewed. It is commonly referred to as a first impression. 
This can affect an individual’s outlook on you well down the line. 

When I am asked this, often my thoughts race. Do I mention my love of 
biriyani? My affinity towards sandbox/procedurally generated games? or 
perhaps my college major? No, I shouldn’t, right? These points have
absolutely no relation to each other. 

Well, maybe I could throw in some adjectives like how organized I am, 
or neat. I could say these things, but qualities are highly subjective 
and it is hard to gauge one's aptitude in any of these skills without 
interacting with them extensively over some time. Oh god, what do I 
say, they are getting impatient…

These thoughts swirl in my thoughts whenever I am asked this. I cannot 
ensconce myself in my mind like this since the other party is often 
patiently waiting and eager to hear the response. Social norms disallow 
extensive pauses or thinking during conversations.

So, how do I answer this?

I have come to realize, that it is based on two main factors. 


Context

When people ask you about yourself, there is a certain level of implicit 
responses they want to hear. Often times as I have seen, it is based on 
the situation. 

In informal situations, people want to hear about things you do for fun, 
while in more professional settings, they want to hear about yourself. 
Is it at a party? or was it at a meeting? at the park? I always figure it 
out based on the level of formality.  Events geared toward entertainment 
have lower levels of formality, while events geared towards progress and 
serious topics don’t.

For example, on a basketball court, I introduced myself as a taco-loving 
Lebron fan.

At a job fair, I described myself as a detail-oriented developer.

This showcases skills like situational awareness and attention to detail, 
skills that are highly coveted and viewed highly favorably.

Forget how you are viewed for just a second. These two skills in an 
individual the scale will greatly lower poor decision-making.


Conciseness

As much as people are interested in what you say, they are just as 
interested in one more thing: conciseness. How well do you communicate 
in as little time as possible? Describing yourself with a few, powerful 
words will reveal enough of your character for an individual to assess you. 

Being specific matters. Being specific is a sign of being targeted. It 
shows that you have an understanding of who you are and what you do. It 
shows you have clarity and a certain control over your life.

Let us juxtapose three variations of an example related to what I mean. 
Let us say you are talking to a shipping executive and you are a dockyard 
manager.

“I manage containers, and coordinate with the logistics company”

versus

“I preside over medium-sized containers of ships from Japan and arrange 
semi-truck offloaders with the logistics company”

versus 

“I preside over medium-sized containers of ships from Japan, like Toyota 
cargo ships which bring over Camry from Toyota’s Aichi factory. Amazing 
cars, I had one for 25 years and it ran like a champ. I also coordinate 
with Maersk of Denmark, an amazing country by the way, I went there for 
my second marriage’s honeymoon and I got semi truck personnel to offload 
the ship”

Right away, you notice the superiority of the second one. It details 
specific attributes that relate specifically to the person. The first one 
has no detail and likely exudes disinterest in the executive. It makes you 
seem unconfident, and unknowledgeable about your field due to a lack of 
specific details. 

The third one is rambling, and frankly quite incoherent. It is hard to pay
attention to details that matter. It screams a lack of self-disrespect due
to dropping excessive personal details, a dash of arrogance, and distraction
due to mentioning the Camry.

While not every conversation related to yourself will go like this, I have 
learned to keep these two things specifically in mind. I am in the early 
stages of my adult life and have yet to really implement this, but I am 
willing to use these two points to play it safe. I can expand on this after a 
few years of experience, but so far this defensive tactic seems to work quite 
well for me, so I will keep it.
